# Supplemental material of published manuscripts

This directory contains scripts and files supporting publications from the BRGE lab. These include:

**Ruiz-Arenas, Carlos et al., 2023** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Ruiz_Arenas_2023)

>Epimutations are rare alterations of the normal DNA methylation pattern at specific loci, which can lead to rare diseases. Methylation microarrays enable genome-wide epimutation detection, but technical limitations prevent their use in clinical settings: methods applied to rare diseases’ data cannot be easily incorporated to standard analyses pipelines, while epimutation methods implemented in R packages (ramr) have not been validated for rare diseases. We have developed epimutacions, a Bioconductor package (https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/epimutacions.html). epimutacions implements two previously reported methods and four new statistical approaches to detect epimutations, along with functions to annotate and visualize epimutations. Additionally, we have developed an user-friendly Shiny app to facilitate epimutations detection (https://github.com/isglobal-brge/epimutacionsShiny) to non-bioinformatician users. We first compared the performance of epimutacions and ramr packages using three public datasets with experimentally validated epimutations. Methods in epimutacions had a high performance at low sample sizes and outperformed methods in ramr. Second, we used two general population children cohorts (INMA and HELIX) to determine the technical and biological factors that affect epimutations detection, providing guidelines on how designing the experiments or preprocessing the data. In these cohorts, most epimutations did not correlate with detectable regional gene expression changes. Finally, we exemplified how epimutacions can be used in a clinical context. We run epimutacions in a cohort of children with autism disorder and identified novel recurrent epimutations in candidate genes for autism. Overall, we present epimutacions a new Bioconductor package for incorporating epimutations detection to rare disease diagnosis and provide guidelines for the design and data analyses.

**Gonzalez, Juan R et al., 2023** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Gonzalez_2023)

>Injury prevention is a crucial aspect of sports, particularly in high-performance settings such as elite female football. Developing robust and accurate injury prediction models that can identify athletes at a higher risk of injury is crucial to minimize injury incidence and ensure the longevity of an athlete's career. Recent advances in technology and data analytics have provided new opportunities for developing more comprehensive injury prediction models. Among these, incorporating global positioning system (GPS) data and multi-omics (genomics and metabolomics) data are gaining popularity in the research community. Therefore, this study aimed to develop an injury prediction model that incorporates clinical and both GPS and multi-omics data to better understand the factors associated with injury in elite female football players. We designed a prospective cohort study over two seasons (2019-2020 and 2021-2022) of non-contact injuries (NCI) in 24 elite female players in the Spanish premiership competition. We used GPS data to determine external workload, genomic data to capture genetic susceptibility, and metabolomic data to measure internal workload. We mode GPS variables by using distributed lag non-linear models to account for the cumulative effect of workload, while metabolomic data was introduced as time-dependent variable. 40 NCIs were recorded and the most frequent were muscle (63%) and ligament (20%) injuries. The baseline risk model included fat mass and the random effect of the player. Six genetic polymorphisms located at DCN, ADAMTS5, ESRRB, VEGFA, and MMP1 genes were associated with injuries after adjusting for player load (p<0.05). The genetic score created with these six variants determined groups of players with different profile risks (p=3.1 x 10-4). Three metabolites (alanine, serotonin, and 5-hydroxy-tryptophan) correlated with injuries. The model comprising baseline variables, genetic score, and player load showed the best prediction capacity (C-index: 0.74). This model could allow efficient, personalised interventions based on the athlete's vulnerability. However, we emphasize the necessity for further validation studies involving other teams and individual athletes. By expanding the scope of our research and incorporating diverse populations, we can bolster the generalizability and robustness of our proposed model


**Carreras-Gallo, Natalia et al., 2022** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Carreras-Gallo_2022)

> Impact of tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana on genome-wide DNA methylation and its relationship with hypertension
>
> Tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana consumption is an important public health problem because of their high use worldwide and association with the risk of mortality and many health conditions, such as hypertension. High blood pressure is the commonest risk factor for death throughout the world and DNA methylation is a likely mediator between substance consumption and this condition. Here, we evaluated the effect of tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana on DNA methylation in the same cohort (N=3,424). Three epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS) were assessed in whole blood using the InfiniumHumanMethylationEPIC BeadChip. We also evaluated the mediation role of the top CpG sites in the association between substance consumption and hypertension. Our analyses showed 2,569 CpG sites differentially methylated by alcohol drinking and 528 by tobacco smoking at Bonferroni level. We did not find significant associations with marijuana consumption. We found 20 genes overlapping between alcohol and tobacco that were enriched in signaling events in the nervous system and neurodevelopment. In the mediation analysis, we found 8 CpG sites that significantly mediated the effect of alcohol consumption on hypertension. The top alcohol-related CpG site (cg06690548, P-value = 5.9·10-83) mapped to SLC7A11 and strongly mediated the 73.6% of the effect of alcohol consumption on hypertension (P-value = 0.008). Our findings suggest that DNA methylation should be considered for new targets in hypertension prevention and management. We also encourage to investigate the mediation between substance consumption and neurological disorders, since our results suggest a role of drug related CpG sites in the nervous system.


**Ruiz-Arenas, Carlos et al., Genome Research, 2020** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Ruiz-Arenas_2020)

> [Ruiz-Arenas et al.](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/792747v1), 2020. A method to identify chromosomal subpopulations based on their recombination histories advances the study of the genetic basis of phenotypic traits.  
> 
> Recombination is a main source of genetic variability. However, the potential role of the variation generated by recombination in phenotypic traits, including diseases, remains unexplored as there is currently no method to infer chromosomal subpopulations based on recombination patterns differences. We developed recombClust, a method that uses SNP-phased data to detect differences in historic recombination in a chromosome population. We validated our method by performing simulations and by using real data to accurately predict the alleles of well known recombination modifiers, including common inversions in Drosophila melanogaster and human, and the chromosomes under selective pressure at the lactase locus in humans. We then applied recombClust to the complex human 1q21.1 region, where nonallelic homologous recombination produces deleterious phenotypes. We discovered and validated the presence of two different recombination histories in these regions that significantly associated with the differential expression of ANKRD35 in whole blood and that were in high linkage with variants previously associated with hypertension. By detecting differences in historic recombination, our method opens a way to assess the influence of recombination variation in phenotypic traits.


**Abarrategui, Leire et al., 2021** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Abarrategui_2021)
>
> Rare diseases are pathologies with a low prevalence (< 1 per 2,000 people). Most of these pathologies have an onset during childhood and a strong genetic etiology. Due to their low prevalence, there is a lack of knowledge which causes a delay in diagnosis and a lack of effective treatment. Thus, affecting the life expectancy and quality of the patient. Current methodologies for identifying mutations related to rare diseases have relied on Whole Genomic Sequencing. Despite exhaustive assessments, in a large proportion of case subjects, the underlying genetic etiology is not identified or the clinical assessment does not indicate a diagnosis. In order to overcome this difficulty, genome-wide DNA methylation analysis has been proposed to facilitate the molecular diagnosis of unresolved clinical cases and be consider for routine clinical assessment.  We develop epimutacions, a method that detects outliers in DNA methylation patterns associated with the diseases as proposed by [Aref-Eshghi et al., 2019](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0002929719301041).  We validated our method by performing simulations based on the data and results obtained by [Garg et al., 2020](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0002929720302883). 

**Pelegri-Siso, Dolors et al., 2021** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Pelegri-Siso_2021)
>

**4. Carreras-Gallo, Natalia and Caceres, Alejandro et al., 2021** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Carreras-Gallo_Caceres_2021)

> The effect of polymorphic inversions on DNA methylation and its modulation by the early-life exposome 
> 
> Polymorphic genomic inversions are chromosomal variants with intrinsic variability that play important roles in evolution, environmental adaptation, and complex traits. We investigated the DNA methylation patterns of three common human inversions, at 8p23.1, 16p11.2, and 17q21.31 in 1,009 blood samples from children and in 39 prenatal heart tissue samples. We found inversion-state specific methylation patterns within and nearby flanking each inversion region in both datasets. Additionally, numerous inversion-exposure interactions on methylation levels were identified from early-life exposome data comprising 64 exposures. For instance, children homozygous at inv-8p23.1 and higher meat intake were more susceptible to TDH hypermethylation (P=3.8x10-22); being the inversion, exposure, and gene known risk factors for adult obesity. Inv-8p23.1 associated hypermethylation of GATA4 was also detected across numerous exposures. Our data indicate that the pleiotropic influence of inversions during development and lifetime is substantially mediated by allele-specific methylation patterns which can be modulated by the exposome. 



**Caceres, Alejandro and Gonzalez, Juan R 2022** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Caceres_2022)

> teff: estimation of Treatment EFFects on transcriptomic data with casual random forest
> 
> Causal inference on high dimensional feature data can be used to find a profile of patients who will benefit the most from treatment rather than no treatment. However, there is a need for usable implementations for transcriptomic data. We devel-oped teff that applies random causal forest on gene expression data to target individuals with high expected treatment effects.

> We applied teff to extract a profile of high benefit of treating psoriasis with brodalumab and observed that it was associat-ed with high T cell abundance in non-lesional skin at baseline and a low response to etanercept in an independent study. Individual patient targeting with causal inference profiling can inform the choice between treatments before the intervention begins.

**Caceres, Alejandro, Perez-Jurado, Luis A. and Gonzales, JUan R 2022** [(Supp Material)](https://github.com/isglobal-brge/Supplementary-Material/tree/master/Caceres_2022)

> Sexual-dimorphism in immune cell abundance in blood can contribute to the sex differences in cancer incidence and mortality. However, little is known about the genes associated with high immune sexual-dimorphism and their potential predictive value for disease. Using machine learning methods, we identified and validated the presence of a subpopulation where women have higher T cell abundance in blood than men. Females in the subpopulation upregulate XIST and TSIX, drivers of chromosome X inactivation and escapee genes (DDX3X, KDM5C and RPS4X), while men downregulate the homologs (DDX3Y, KDM5D and RPS4Y1), predictors of chromosome Y downregulation. This subpopulation of high immune female-biased dimorphism associated with high cancer survival and low cancer risk in females. Part of the female advantage on cancer risk and survival can thus be explained by immune dimorphisms residing in a set of genes located in both sex chromosomes.
